The intentions for the rules of this challenge are to allow the greatest possible problem space for the participants, and the least restrictions. So, in the spirit of making, if you don’t like a rule; ignore it — but be prepared to have to defend your choice! Oh, and you *will* need to fill in a health and safety form if you want to be firing things in Maker Faire, and you will need to think about the possible injury points of any mechanism you’re making if you intend members of the public to use them at any time. *And letting people play will cool things is surely a big part of taking things to Maker Faire?!*

Challenge
---------

Build a device that can propel small light weight projectiles against a target. The ammunition can be chosen between from:

 * Nerf-type foam darts (soft tipped please!)
 * 40mm table tennis/ping pong balls 
 * 55mm ball pool balls
 
The device can be made from no more than a single sheet of A0 (1200mm x 900mm) material, 3mm thick. 

The device must be predominantly made by laser cutting, but all other materials, components and fixings are free.

You’ll need to bring your own ammo. (Although there will likely be more around, but don’t rely on it, you might be the only person running that ammunition)

Must be ready by MakerFaire UK 2015.

Winning Conditions
------------------

The highest score generated by hitting the projectiles against scored impact sensor targets in a 30 second limit, as scored by the range microcontroller. The maximum range length will be 22m/75ft. 

Firing attempts will be available for as long as possible while ever Maker Faire UK is accessible to exhibitors (and the range is working).

Prizes
------

Pride and the knowledge and undying admiration of everyone you meet that you won. Unless someone actually offers a real prize, in which case, that. 

It’s probably worth us actually having a trophy in any case, in which case, someone’s going to have to make that (@oomlout has volunteered), I’m (@DefProc) bringing the range!


In More Detail
--------------

Make a device that fires _nerf-type foam darts_ OR _ping pong balls_ OR _ball pool balls_ to use on a range of no more than 75 feet / 22 meters. *This is a non-exclusive OR, you could use all three projectile types!*

The range target will be an array of piezo based impact sensors, with the number of points set for each sensor (point range and sizes to be decided). The winner will be the entry with the highest points score over a timed 30 second period. 

Launching mechanism choice is completely optional. In the “throwdown” video I mention using motor launching (passing the projectile through motorised wheels to impart kinetic energy) but any launching mechanism you can think of is acceptable (e.g. spring launched, hit with a bat, pneumatic propulsion) but do remember that you will have to fill in a risk assessment form to be able to use it in the venue.

In terms of energy imparted to the projectile, there will have to be a sensible limit to reduce the risk of injury to the participants, spectators, bystanders and the target sensors. While a 1 Joule energy limit is placed on Airsoft projectiles, and provides a good rule of thumb for design when you’re calculating launch velocity, energy limitation of the projectile will be slightly different for this competition. To make sure the projectile energy levels are low enough for the netting that will screen the range, participants will have to submit to a short scrutineering test that will include them being shot with their own entry. Details below.

I (DefProc) feel that having a set number of rounds for getting a score is completely arbitrary, so I’d rather have open access to the range throughout the weekend, where the highest score of any attempt decides the winner. This way, breakdowns can be fixed, and problems sorted out after all, everyone fails until the time they succeed. 

This is the Lasercut Challenge, the crucial point is to use laser cutting as the primary form of construction for your device, that is: it should be the largest proportional manufacturing method by parts volume.  Any other manufacturing or fixing method you would like to use is also available to you; this is to show your ingenuity after all. 

To limit the size of the resultant device, the maximum cutting area of material allowed is A0 (1200×900mm), though this may be split into multiple sheets up to this area limit. Material thickness is limited to 3mm (so any laser cutter can cut the results) but it’s entirely reasonable to cut multiple items and layer them up to be thicker. It’s also reasonable for an entrant to cut pieces in a thicker material to use in the actual machine, but the multiple shapes should be accounted for in the maximum area allowance of the sheet. 

This is a maker challenge that was dreamed up after an Open Source Hardware User Group and a UK Maker Belt Association symposium, so you are expected to follow the principles of Open Source Hardware and the spirit of the Maker ethos and publish the design files for the device that you make. You are highly encouraged to make you designs, plans, pictures and solutions public as you go. You can prove conclusively that making things open source does not preclude your competitive advantage, and you will increase support for the competition (and open yourself to friendly rivalry from other competitors). 

Eligability
-----------

The initial challenge was thrown down between @oomlout, @DefProc (on behalf of DoES Liverpool) and @rabid_inventor (on behalf of Pimoroni), however anyone can participate (theoretically). In practice, the challenge may be limited to participants registered to exhibit at Maker Faire UK 2015 in Newcastle (as that’s where the target board will be) and these people can submit Risk Assessment forms to the Centre for Life. And yes, you will need a risk assessment for firing projectiles from your device in a public event!

We will have contact the Maker Faire UK team to see if we can allow walk up competitors who have correctly completed risk assessments, which we will then have to make available. 

If you would like to participate without being at Maker Faire UK 2015, you will be able to replicate the firing range in the place of your leisure, as it will be open source too. So you could participate in the spirit of the challenge without even being anywhere near any of the parts of the challenge physically. Videos of your attempts and scores are encouraged. 

How to enter
------------

Be at Maker Faire with a firing device that has been allowed by the Centre for Life and is able to fire.

Ideally you’ll message me @DefProc or contact@defproc.co.uk beforehand. And ideally you’ll also share build pictures and progress before Maker Faire. Lets try a hashtag of #MFUKLC

Scrutineering
-------------

As part of the entrance requirements, you will have to have filled out a risk assessment for the Centre for Life in order to use your entry. In addition to that you will be asked to partake in a short scrutineering to determine that your device is safe to use around the public. 

Outside of the times that Maker Faire is open to the public you will have to:

 * Demonstrate the working of your device with everyone well away from you to see if the projectile is reliably sent towards the target direction and doesn’t pierce the netting around the range.
 * Stand in front of the device at half the range length (but no less than 7 meters) and have it fired at you (you can choose to face or look away!)

Target
------

The target design is yet to be completed, but it will be an array separate sensor plates hung from a frame where each sensor plate has a piezo element bonded to it, and is attached via a clipped RC circuit to an Arduino that will register the hits to the sensor and multiply them by the the sensor’s points value to record the total score. 

Sensor sizes are expected to range from 300mm square for low scoring plates down to 100mm square for the highest scoring plates. They are expected to be square, and arranged with the lowest scoring plates outside of the highest scoring plates, although it may not be a strict bullseye, it might be a bit more Charles Rennie Macintosh. We’ll let you know as it comes together!

At the participant’s end of the range will be an electronic scoreboard and a start button. Upon hitting the button, the participants 30 second period to fire will begin, and the sensor scores will be registered for that time. At the end of the time, the score will show, and we might need a sound of some sort. If we get really fancy and IoT’d up, then you might be able to put in your name and it’ll auto-tweet the scores. 

Sensor design, Arduino program and range setup will all be open sourced before the event. 

Design Notes
------------

Based on the specification of the target design, you’ll be wanting to put a lot of projectiles down the range as quickly as possible and with a reasonable amount of accuracy. Based on an expected sensor recovery rate of 0.1 seconds, the maximum number of hits you can score on any one sensor plate be 300 over the 30 seconds score period. Aiming for a reliable 10 shots per second is likely to be in the running for the prize, and more than 1000 projectiles per entrant is likely to be redundant. 

Accuracy is key, because this isn’t a firing rate competition, it’s a scoring one. Different sensors will give you different scores, so you want to reliably be able to hit the highest scoring (and therefore smallest) sensor as much as possible. Because of the style of hit recording though, it’s possible that one projectile could hit more than one sensor and score more than once, e.g. if it were to hit the edge of two sensors it would score for both.

Also because an increased number of hits gives a better chance of a high score, reloading rate is likely to be very important to competitor success. Reloading rate is likely to make you choose between concentrating all of your effort on a single firing mechanism, or going for a multiple firing points. 

It’s also worth pointing out that there’s enough scope in the rules that you could just have a group of people at one end of the range throwing projectiles at the targets! It might even be worthwhile spending some time modifying a nerf gun to fire very fast, and then drilling yourself to change magazines fast enough to make the firing rate…


### .:Thoughts / Questions:. ((oomlout))

Feels a lot of work for just three entrants, will also be unused most of the weekend as a result. (that said got the sense defproc already had plans and we might just be using his firing range)
Speed is good but doesn’t really interest me. I like precision (as commented). That said speed is fun so have no trouble with that being the winning metric. 
Like the bonus point concept (like open development, automated running after setup etc. perhaps we could come up with a list). That said I’m quite pleased just to go at it, and we don’t want to make things too complicated.
Can you reload during the run, or is initial hopper size the limit?
On the open source front. Like the idea of it all being shared. Thoughts on a single GitHub repo structured similar to. That way open development is encouraged, and again kudos/points can be rewarded to good documentation.
 * Rules
 * Range
 * Resources ((amazing you tube video links, ping pong ball sources etc)
 * Trophy
 * Entries //(maybe year to pretend it has history)// Competitor (four letters I call OOML) (can use the readme in your directory to document build process as well)

The intentions for the rules of this challenge are to allow the greatest possible problem space for the participants, and the least restrictions. So, in the spirit of making, if you don’t like a rule; ignore it — but be prepared to have to defend your choice! Oh, and you will need to fill in a health and safety form if you want to be firing things in Maker Faire, and you will need to think about the possible injury points of any mechanism you’re making if you intend members of the public to use them at any time. And letting people play will cool things is surely a big part of taking things to Maker Faire?!


